docs/data/stashcache/install-origin.md, before:

Installing the StashCache Origin
================================

This document describes how to install a StashCache origin service.  This service allows an organization
to export its data to the StashCache data federation.

!!! note
    The _origin_ must be registered with the OSG prior to joining the data federation. You may start the
    registration process prior to finishing the installation by [using this link](#registering-the-origin) 
    along with information like:

    * Resource name and hostname
    * VO associated with this origin server (which will be used to determine the origin's namespace prefix)
    * Administrative and security contact(s)
    * Who (or what) will be allowed to access the VO's data
    * Which caches will be allowed to cache the VO data

Before Starting
---------------

Before starting the installation process, consider the following points:

* __Operating system:__ A RHEL 7 or compatible operating system.
* __User IDs:__ If they do not exist already, the installation will create the Linux user IDs `condor` and `xrootd`;
  only the `xrootd` user is utilized for the running daemons.
* __Host certificate:__ The origin service uses a host certificate to authenticate with the caches it serves.
  The [host certificate documentation](/security/host-certs.md) provides more information on setting up host
  certificates.
* __Network ports:__ The origin service requires the following ports open:
  * Inbound TCP port 1094 for file access via the XRootD protocol
  * Outbound TCP port 1213 to `redirector.osgstorage.org` for connecting to the data federation
  * Outbound UDP port 9930 for reporting to `xrd-report.osgstorage.org` and `xrd-mon.osgstorage.org` for monitoring.
* __Hardware requirements:__ We recommend that an origin has at least 1Gbps connectivity and 8GB of RAM.
  We suggest that several gigabytes of local disk space be available for log files,
  although some logging verbosity can be reduced.

As with all OSG software installations, there are some one-time steps to prepare in advance:

* Obtain root access to the host
* Prepare [the required Yum repositories](/common/yum.md)
* Install [CA certificates](/common/ca.md)

Installing the Origin
---------------------

The origin service consists of one or more XRootD daemons and their dependencies for the authentication infrastructure.
To simplify installation, OSG provides convenience RPMs that install all required
software with a single command:

```console
root@host # yum install stash-origin
```

For this installation guide, we assume that the data to be exported to the federation is mounted at `/mnt/stash`
and owned by the `xrootd:xrootd` user.

Configuring the Origin Server
-----------------------------

The `stash-origin` package provides a default configuration files in
`/etc/xrootd/xrootd-stash-origin.cfg` and `/etc/xrootd/config.d`.
Administrators may provide additional configuration by placing files in `/etc/xrootd/config.d`
of the form `/etc/xrootd/config.d/1*.cfg` (for directives that need to be processed BEFORE the OSG configuration)
or `/etc/xrootd/config.d/9*.cfg` (for directives that are processed AFTER the OSG configuration).

You _must_ configure every variable in `/etc/xrootd/10-common-site-local.cfg` and `/etc/xrootd/10-origin-site-local.cfg`.

The mandatory variables to configure are:

| File                     | Config line                             | Description                                                                                           |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 10-common-site-local.cfg | `set rootdir = /mnt/stash`              | The mounted filesystem path to export; this document calls it `/mnt/stash`                            |
| 10-common-site-local.cfg | `set resourcename = YOUR_RESOURCE_NAME` | The resource name registered with OSG                                                                 |
| 10-origin-site-local.cfg | `set originexport = /VO`                | The directory relative to `rootdir` that is the top of the exported namespace for the origin services |

For example, if the HCC VO would like to set up an origin server exporting from the mount point `/mnt/stash`,
and HCC's registered namespace is `/hcc`, then the following would be set in `10-common-site-local.cfg`:

```
set rootdir = /mnt/stash
set resourcename = HCC_STASH_ORIGIN
```

And the following would be set in `10-origin-site-local.cfg`:
```
set originexport = /hcc
```

With this configuration, the data under `/mnt/stash/hcc/bio/datasets` would be available under the StashCache path
`/hcc/bio/datasets` and the data under `/mnt/stash/hcc/hep/generators` would be available under the StashCache path
`/hcc/hep/generators`.

!!! warning
    If you want to run origins for authenticated and unauthenticated data,
    you **must** run them on separate hosts.
    This requires registering a resource for each host.
    This requirement will be removed in a future version of StashCache.

!!! warning
    The StashCache namespace is *global* within a data federation.
    Directories you export **must not** collide with directories provided by other origin servers; this is
    why the explicit registration is required.


Managing the Origin Service
---------------------------
The origin service consists of the following SystemD units that you must directly manage:

| **Service name** | **Notes** |
|------------------|-----------|
| `xrootd@stash-origin.service` | Performs data transfers (unauthenticated instance) |
| `xrootd@stash-origin-auth.service` | Performs data transfers (authenticated instance) |

These services must be managed with `systemctl` and may start additional services as dependencies.
As a reminder, here are common service commands (all run as `root`):

| To...                                   | On EL7, run the command...         |
| :-------------------------------------- | :--------------------------------- |
| Start a service                         | `systemctl start <SERVICE-NAME>`   |
| Stop a service                          | `systemctl stop <SERVICE-NAME>`    |
| Enable a service to start on boot       | `systemctl enable <SERVICE-NAME>`  |
| Disable a service from starting on boot | `systemctl disable <SERVICE-NAME>` |

In addition, the origin service automatically uses the following SystemD units:

| **Service name** | **Notes** |
|------------------|-----------|
| `cmsd@stash-origin.service` | Integrates the origin into the data federation (unauthenticated instance) |
| `cmsd@stash-origin-auth.service` | Integrates the origin into the data federation (authenticated instance) |
| `stash-origin-authfile.timer` | Updates the authorization files periodically |
| `xcache-reporter.timer` | Reports usage stats periodically |
| `xrootd-renew-proxy.timer` | Renews grid proxy periodically |

Verifying the Origin Server
---------------------------

Once your server has been registered with the OSG and started,
perform the following steps to verify that it is functional.


### Testing availability

To verify that your origin is correctly advertising its availability, run the following command from the origin server:

```console
[user@server ~]$ xrdmapc -r --list s redirector.osgstorage.org:1094
0**** redirector.osgstorage.org:1094
      Srv ceph-gridftp1.grid.uchicago.edu:1094
      Srv stashcache.fnal.gov:1094
      Srv stash.osgconnect.net:1094
      Srv origin.ligo.caltech.edu:1094
      Srv csiu.grid.iu.edu:1094
```

The output should list the hostname of your origin server.


### Testing directory export

To verify that the directories you are exporting are visible from the redirector,
run the following command from the origin server:

```console
[user@server ~]$ xrdmapc -r --verify --list s redirector.osgstorage.org:1094 %RED%<exported dir>%ENDCOLOR%
0*rv* redirector.osgstorage.org:1094
  >+  Srv ceph-gridftp1.grid.uchicago.edu:1094
   ?  Srv stashcache.fnal.gov:1094 [not authorized]
  >+  Srv stash.osgconnect.net:1094
   -  Srv origin.ligo.caltech.edu:1094
   ?  Srv csiu.grid.iu.edu:1094 [connect error]
```

Your server should be marked with a `>+` to indicate that it contains the given path and the path was accessible.


### Testing file access

To verify that you can download a file from the origin server, use the `stashcp` tool.
Place a test file in the exported dir.
`stashcp` is available in the `stashcache-client` RPM.
Run the following command:

```console
[user@host]$ stashcp %RED%<test file>%ENDCOLOR% /tmp/testfile
```
<!-- ^ note the unicode space ' ' between "test" and "file" to fix syntax highlighting
       (because it thinks "test" is a keyword)
--->

If successful, there should be a file at `/tmp/testfile` with the contents of the test file on your origin server.
If unsuccessful, you can pass the `-d` flag to `stashcp` for debug info.

You can also test directly downloading from the origin via `xrdcp`, which is available in the `xrootd-client` RPM.
Run the following command:

```console
[user@host]$ xrdcp xroot://<origin server>:1094/<testfile> /tmp/testfile
```

Registering the Origin
----------------------
To be part of the OSG StashCache Federation, your origin must be
[registered with the OSG](/common/registration.md).  The service type is `XRootD origin server`.

The resource must also specify which VOs it will serve data from.
To do this, add an `AllowedVOs` list, with each line specifying a VO whose StashCache data the resource is willing to host.
For example:
```yaml
  MY_STASHCACHE_ORIGIN:
    Service: XRootD origin server
      Description: StashCache origin server
    AllowedVOs:
      - GLOW
      - OSG
```
You can use the special value `ANY` to indicate that the origin will serve data from any VO that puts data on it.

In addition to the origin allowing a VOs via the `AllowedVOs` list,
that VO must also allow the origin in its `DataFederations/StashCache/AllowedOrigins` list.
See the page on [getting your VO's data into StashCache](/data/stashcache/vo-data).

Getting Help
------------

To get assistance, please use the [this page](/common/help) or contact <help@opensciencegrid.org> directly.

Commit message:

Add warning about exporting top directory level
Found this out while trying to set up the icecube export: `all.export /icecube/PUBLIC` didn't work so I had to do `all.export /icecube`.

docs/data/stashcache/install-origin.md, after:

Installing the StashCache Origin
================================

This document describes how to install a StashCache origin service.  This service allows an organization
to export its data to the StashCache data federation.

!!! note
    The _origin_ must be registered with the OSG prior to joining the data federation. You may start the
    registration process prior to finishing the installation by [using this link](#registering-the-origin) 
    along with information like:

    * Resource name and hostname
    * VO associated with this origin server (which will be used to determine the origin's namespace prefix)
    * Administrative and security contact(s)
    * Who (or what) will be allowed to access the VO's data
    * Which caches will be allowed to cache the VO data

Before Starting
---------------

Before starting the installation process, consider the following points:

* __Operating system:__ A RHEL 7 or compatible operating system.
* __User IDs:__ If they do not exist already, the installation will create the Linux user IDs `condor` and `xrootd`;
  only the `xrootd` user is utilized for the running daemons.
* __Host certificate:__ The origin service uses a host certificate to authenticate with the caches it serves.
  The [host certificate documentation](/security/host-certs.md) provides more information on setting up host
  certificates.
* __Network ports:__ The origin service requires the following ports open:
  * Inbound TCP port 1094 for file access via the XRootD protocol
  * Outbound TCP port 1213 to `redirector.osgstorage.org` for connecting to the data federation
  * Outbound UDP port 9930 for reporting to `xrd-report.osgstorage.org` and `xrd-mon.osgstorage.org` for monitoring.
* __Hardware requirements:__ We recommend that an origin has at least 1Gbps connectivity and 8GB of RAM.
  We suggest that several gigabytes of local disk space be available for log files,
  although some logging verbosity can be reduced.

As with all OSG software installations, there are some one-time steps to prepare in advance:

* Obtain root access to the host
* Prepare [the required Yum repositories](/common/yum.md)
* Install [CA certificates](/common/ca.md)

Installing the Origin
---------------------

The origin service consists of one or more XRootD daemons and their dependencies for the authentication infrastructure.
To simplify installation, OSG provides convenience RPMs that install all required
software with a single command:

```console
root@host # yum install stash-origin
```

For this installation guide, we assume that the data to be exported to the federation is mounted at `/mnt/stash`
and owned by the `xrootd:xrootd` user.

Configuring the Origin Server
-----------------------------

The `stash-origin` package provides a default configuration files in
`/etc/xrootd/xrootd-stash-origin.cfg` and `/etc/xrootd/config.d`.
Administrators may provide additional configuration by placing files in `/etc/xrootd/config.d`
of the form `/etc/xrootd/config.d/1*.cfg` (for directives that need to be processed BEFORE the OSG configuration)
or `/etc/xrootd/config.d/9*.cfg` (for directives that are processed AFTER the OSG configuration).

You _must_ configure every variable in `/etc/xrootd/10-common-site-local.cfg` and `/etc/xrootd/10-origin-site-local.cfg`.

The mandatory variables to configure are:

| File                     | Config line                             | Description                                                                                           |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 10-common-site-local.cfg | `set rootdir = /mnt/stash`              | The mounted filesystem path to export; this document calls it `/mnt/stash`                            |
| 10-common-site-local.cfg | `set resourcename = YOUR_RESOURCE_NAME` | The resource name registered with OSG                                                                 |
| 10-origin-site-local.cfg | `set originexport = /VO`                | The directory relative to `rootdir` that is the top of the exported namespace for the origin services |

For example, if the HCC VO would like to set up an origin server exporting from the mount point `/mnt/stash`,
and HCC's registered namespace is `/hcc`, then the following would be set in `10-common-site-local.cfg`:

```
set rootdir = /mnt/stash
set resourcename = HCC_STASH_ORIGIN
```

And the following would be set in `10-origin-site-local.cfg`:
```
set originexport = /hcc
```

With this configuration, the data under `/mnt/stash/hcc/bio/datasets` would be available under the StashCache path
`/hcc/bio/datasets` and the data under `/mnt/stash/hcc/hep/generators` would be available under the StashCache path
`/hcc/hep/generators`.

!!! warning
    If you want to run origins for authenticated and unauthenticated data,
    you **must** run them on separate hosts.
    This requires registering a resource for each host.
    This requirement will be removed in a future version of StashCache.

!!! warning
    The StashCache namespace is *global* within a data federation.
    Directories you export **must not** collide with directories provided by other origin servers; this is
    why the explicit registration is required.

!!! warning
    The origin can only export one directory level below the `rootdir`,
    so exporting `/hcc` would work, but exporting `/hcc/data1` would not work.

Managing the Origin Service
---------------------------
The origin service consists of the following SystemD units that you must directly manage:

| **Service name** | **Notes** |
|------------------|-----------|
| `xrootd@stash-origin.service` | Performs data transfers (unauthenticated instance) |
| `xrootd@stash-origin-auth.service` | Performs data transfers (authenticated instance) |

These services must be managed with `systemctl` and may start additional services as dependencies.
As a reminder, here are common service commands (all run as `root`):

| To...                                   | On EL7, run the command...         |
| :-------------------------------------- | :--------------------------------- |
| Start a service                         | `systemctl start <SERVICE-NAME>`   |
| Stop a service                          | `systemctl stop <SERVICE-NAME>`    |
| Enable a service to start on boot       | `systemctl enable <SERVICE-NAME>`  |
| Disable a service from starting on boot | `systemctl disable <SERVICE-NAME>` |

In addition, the origin service automatically uses the following SystemD units:

| **Service name** | **Notes** |
|------------------|-----------|
| `cmsd@stash-origin.service` | Integrates the origin into the data federation (unauthenticated instance) |
| `cmsd@stash-origin-auth.service` | Integrates the origin into the data federation (authenticated instance) |
| `stash-origin-authfile.timer` | Updates the authorization files periodically |
| `xcache-reporter.timer` | Reports usage stats periodically |
| `xrootd-renew-proxy.timer` | Renews grid proxy periodically |

Verifying the Origin Server
---------------------------

Once your server has been registered with the OSG and started,
perform the following steps to verify that it is functional.


### Testing availability

To verify that your origin is correctly advertising its availability, run the following command from the origin server:

```console
[user@server ~]$ xrdmapc -r --list s redirector.osgstorage.org:1094
0**** redirector.osgstorage.org:1094
      Srv ceph-gridftp1.grid.uchicago.edu:1094
      Srv stashcache.fnal.gov:1094
      Srv stash.osgconnect.net:1094
      Srv origin.ligo.caltech.edu:1094
      Srv csiu.grid.iu.edu:1094
```

The output should list the hostname of your origin server.


### Testing directory export

To verify that the directories you are exporting are visible from the redirector,
run the following command from the origin server:

```console
[user@server ~]$ xrdmapc -r --verify --list s redirector.osgstorage.org:1094 %RED%<exported dir>%ENDCOLOR%
0*rv* redirector.osgstorage.org:1094
  >+  Srv ceph-gridftp1.grid.uchicago.edu:1094
   ?  Srv stashcache.fnal.gov:1094 [not authorized]
  >+  Srv stash.osgconnect.net:1094
   -  Srv origin.ligo.caltech.edu:1094
   ?  Srv csiu.grid.iu.edu:1094 [connect error]
```

Your server should be marked with a `>+` to indicate that it contains the given path and the path was accessible.


### Testing file access

To verify that you can download a file from the origin server, use the `stashcp` tool.
Place a test file in the exported dir.
`stashcp` is available in the `stashcache-client` RPM.
Run the following command:

```console
[user@host]$ stashcp %RED%<test file>%ENDCOLOR% /tmp/testfile
```
<!-- ^ note the unicode space ' ' between "test" and "file" to fix syntax highlighting
       (because it thinks "test" is a keyword)
--->

If successful, there should be a file at `/tmp/testfile` with the contents of the test file on your origin server.
If unsuccessful, you can pass the `-d` flag to `stashcp` for debug info.

You can also test directly downloading from the origin via `xrdcp`, which is available in the `xrootd-client` RPM.
Run the following command:

```console
[user@host]$ xrdcp xroot://<origin server>:1094/<testfile> /tmp/testfile
```

Registering the Origin
----------------------
To be part of the OSG StashCache Federation, your origin must be
[registered with the OSG](/common/registration.md).  The service type is `XRootD origin server`.

The resource must also specify which VOs it will serve data from.
To do this, add an `AllowedVOs` list, with each line specifying a VO whose StashCache data the resource is willing to host.
For example:
```yaml
  MY_STASHCACHE_ORIGIN:
    Service: XRootD origin server
      Description: StashCache origin server
    AllowedVOs:
      - GLOW
      - OSG
```
You can use the special value `ANY` to indicate that the origin will serve data from any VO that puts data on it.

In addition to the origin allowing a VOs via the `AllowedVOs` list,
that VO must also allow the origin in its `DataFederations/StashCache/AllowedOrigins` list.
See the page on [getting your VO's data into StashCache](/data/stashcache/vo-data).

Getting Help
------------

To get assistance, please use the [this page](/common/help) or contact <help@opensciencegrid.org> directly.
